lecture 18: Deep Generative Models (Part 2) -- v1 (#21)
sailinglab/pgm-spring-2019: _posts/2019-03-25-lecture-18.md

---
layout: distill
title: "Lecture 18: Deep Generative Models (Part 2)"
description: GANs and their variations, Normalizing Flows and Integrating domain knowledge in DL.
date: 2019-03-25

lecturers:
  - name: Zhiting Hu
    url: "https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~zhitingh/"

authors:
  - name: Ruohong Zhang
    url: "#"  # optional URL to the author's homepage
  - name: Elan Rosenfeld
    url: "#"
  - name: Yifan Sun
    url: "#"
  - name: Sebastian Caldas
    url: "#"

editors:
  - name: Lisa Lee
    url: "#"  # optional URL to the editor's homepage

---

<!-- Ruohong -->
## GANs and their variations
### GAN Progress

> From 2014 to 2018, GAN can generate more high quality and more realistic images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Between 2014 and 2018, GAN has progressively been able to generate more high quality and more realistic images.
```

<figure>
<img src="{{ '/assets/img/notes/lecture-18/gan_progress.jpeg' | relative_url }}" />
<figcaption>
The changing of quality of image generation using GAN. 
Figure courtesy: Ian Goodfellow
</figcaption>
</figure>

### Vanilla GAN Review

> In GAN setting, we have a generative model and a discriminator model. The generative model trys to generate new data given a prior, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the GAN setting, we have a generative model and a discriminator model. The generative model tries to generate new data given a prior, 
```

while the discriminative model distinguishes the difference between the generated data and the true data.

The **generative** part of GAN model maps a random noise to a generated data, i.e. $\bm{x} = G_\theta(\bm{z}), \bm{z} \sim p(\bm{z})$, where $z$ is a random noise and $x$ is the data space.

> It defines a implicit distribution over $x: p_{g_\theta}(x)$, and uses a stochastic process to simulate data $x$. It is intractable to evaluate the likelihood of generated data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It defines an implicit distribution over $x: p_{g_\theta}(x)$, and uses a stochastic process to simulate data $x$. It is intractable to evaluate the likelihood of the generated data.
```

> The **descriminative** part of GAN tells apart the true data distibution from the generated distribution. Specifically, the descrimination $D_\phi (x)$ outputs a probability of $x$ being the true data.

Reviewer: Spelling: "discriminative"

```suggestion
The **discriminative** part of GAN tells apart the true data distribution from the generated distribution. Specifically, the discriminator $D_\phi (x)$ outputs a probability of $x$ being the true data.
```

 
The **learning objective** of GAN can be formulated as a minimax game between the generator and the discriminator. It simultaneously trains a discriminator $D$ to maximize the probability of assigning the correct label to both training examples and generated samples, and trains a generator $G$ to fool the discriminator.
<d-math block>
\min_{G} \max _{D} V(D, G)=E_{\boldsymbol{x} \sim p_{\text { data }}(\boldsymbol{x})}[\log D(\boldsymbol{x})]+ E_{\boldsymbol{z} \sim p_{\boldsymbol{z}}(\boldsymbol{z})}[\log (1-D(G(\boldsymbol{z})))]
</d-math>
Example:
<figure>
<img src="{{'/assets/img/notes/lecture-18/gan_pipeline.png' | relative_url }}" />
<figcaption>
GAN pipeline on MNIST Data
</figcaption>
</figure>

### Wasserstein GAN(WGAN)
In the setting of vanilla GAN, if the data and model's manifold are different, there can be negligible intersection between the two in practice. In this case, the loss function and gradients may not be continous or well-behaved. For example, for some $x$ such that $P_g(x)=0$ but $P_d(x) > 0$, KL divergence is infinite.

> In order to solve the problem, **WGAN** <d-cite key="wgan"></d-cite> was proposed, in which a new objective was used by changing the distance function to Wasserstein Distance(Earth Mover). It measures the minimum transportation cost for making one pile of dirt in the shape of one probability distribution to the shape of the other distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to solve the problem, **WGAN** <d-cite key="wgan"></d-cite> was proposed, in which a new objective was used by changing the distance function to Wasserstein Distance (Earth Mover). It measures the minimum transportation cost for making one pile of dirt in the shape of one probability distribution to the shape of the other distribution.
```

The hard part of learning objective is to ensure that $\|D\|_{L} \leq K$ K-Lipschitz continuous. In the paper, it uses gradient-clipping to ensure $D$ has the Lipschitz continuity, which was acknowledged by the author that it may be a terrible way to do so, but it is simple, yet still effective, and performs better the vanilla GAN.
<d-math block>
W (p_d, p_g) = {1 \over K} \cdot sup_{\|D\|_{L} \leq K} E_{x \sim p_d}[D(x)] - E_{x \sim p_g}[D(x)]
</d-math>

> During the training, we compare the GAN discriminator with the WGAN critic when learning to differentiate two Gaussians. As we can see, the traditional GAN

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During training, we compare the GAN discriminator with the WGAN critic when learning to differentiate between two Gaussians. As we can see, the traditional GAN
```

discriminator saturates and results in vanishing gradients, whereas WGAN critic provides very clean gradients on all parts of the space.

<figure>
<img src="{{'/assets/img/notes/lecture-18/wgan_training.png' | relative_url }}" />
<figcaption>
WGAN Training
</figcaption>
</figure>

### Progressive GAN

> Although GAN can produce sharp images, in most of the cases those images are in small resolutions with limited variation. Directly generating large image is impractable because the training becomes unstable and the model is hard to train. Due to those problems, the **Progressive GAN** <d-cite key="pgan"></d-cite> was proposed to improve the training method for large images. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although GAN can produce sharp images, in most cases, the images are in small resolutions with limited variation. Directly generating large image is impractical due to training instability. Due to those problems, the **Progressive GAN** <d-cite key="pgan"></d-cite> was proposed to improve the training method for large images. 
```

It defines an implicit distribution over $x: p_{g_\theta}(x)$, and uses a stochastic process to simulate data $x$. It is intractable to evaluate the likelihood of the generated data.

The **discriminative** part of GAN tells apart the true data distribution from the generated distribution. Specifically, the discriminator $D_\phi (x)$ outputs a probability of $x$ being the true data.
 
The **learning objective** of GAN can be formulated as a minimax game between the generator and the discriminator. It simultaneously trains a discriminator $D$ to maximize the probability of assigning the correct label to both training examples and generated samples, and trains a generator $G$ to fool the discriminator.
<d-math block>
\min_{G} \max _{D} V(D, G)=E_{\boldsymbol{x} \sim p_{\text { data }}(\boldsymbol{x})}[\log D(\boldsymbol{x})]+ E_{\boldsymbol{z} \sim p_{\boldsymbol{z}}(\boldsymbol{z})}[\log (1-D(G(\boldsymbol{z})))]
</d-math>
Example:
<figure>
<img src="{{'/assets/img/notes/lecture-18/gan_pipeline.png' | relative_url }}" />
<figcaption>
GAN pipeline on MNIST Data
</figcaption>
</figure>

> ### Wasserstein GAN(WGAN)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Wasserstein GAN (WGAN)
```

In the pose conditional person image generation task, we want to generate images based on some template of human poses. The input contains a human image and a target pose, which are minimally labeled dots indicating the target body position of person in the input image. We have a generative model $x\sim p_\theta(x)$, which is an implicit model that transforms the input source and pose directly to the pixels of generated image. 

#### knowledge constraint
In order to evaluate the structural difference between the generated image and the target image, we introduce a constraint function $f_\theta(x)$ that encourages each of the body parts (e.g., head, legs) of the generated image to match the respective part of the target image. Specifically, the constraint $f_\theta(x)$ includes a human parsing module that classifies each pixel of a person image into possible body parts, and then evaluates cross entropies of the per-pixel part distributions between the generated and target images. The average negative cross entropy serves as the constraint score, and higher $f_\theta(x)$ values indicates a better generated $x$ in terms of pariticular domain knowledge.

#### learning objectives

> In the previous sections, the propsed model has two parts: a deep generative model and a knowledge constraint model. In the optimization step, we should have a regular generative objective $\mathcal{L}(\theta)$, and a constraint regularization expectation $E_{p_\theta}[f(x)]$. We put them together, the objective is simply:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous sections, the proposed model has two parts: a deep generative model and a knowledge constraint model. In the optimization step, we should have a regular generative objective $\mathcal{L}(\theta)$, and a constraint regularization expectation $E_{p_\theta}[f(x)]$. Putting them together, the objective is simply:
```

<d-math block>
\min_\theta \mathcal{L}(\theta) - \alpha E_{p_\theta}[f(x)]
</d-math> 

> In general,$E_{p_\theta}[f(x)]$ is hard to optimize unless $p_\theta$ is a GAN-like implicit generative model or an explicit distribution that can be efficiently reparametrized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, $E_{p_\theta}[f(x)]$ is hard to optimize unless $p_\theta$ is a GAN-like implicit generative model or an explicit distribution that can be efficiently reparametrized.
```

For other models such as the large set of non-reparametrizable explicit distributions, the gradient $\nabla E_{p_\theta}[f_\theta(x)]$ is usually computed with the log-derivative trick and can suffer from high variance. For broad applicability and efficient optimization, PR instead imposes the constraint on an auxiliary variational distribution $q$, and introduces a KL divergence term:
<d-math block>
\mathcal{L}(\theta,q)=KL(q(x) \| p_\theta(x)) - \alpha E_q[f(x)] 
</d-math> 
as proxy of $- E_{p_\theta}[f(x)]$

> The optimization problem could be solve by EM algorithm. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The optimization problem can be solve by EM algorithm:
```

<d-math block>
q^*(x)=p_\theta(x)\exp\{\alpha f(x)\} / Z
</d-math> 
where $Z$ is the normalization term.

In the M step, we plug in $q^*$ and optimize w.r.t. $\theta$ with:
<d-math block>
\min_\theta KL(q(x)\|p_\theta(x))=\min_\theta \mathcal{L}(\theta) - E_{q^*}[\log p_\theta(x)] 
</d-math> 

#### Learnable constraints
In previous formulation, constraint $f(x)$ has to be fully-specified a priori and is fixed throughout the learning. It would be desirable or necessary to enable learnable constraint, so that people can specify the know constraints, while leaving the unknown parts learned by the model. We would like to introduce learnable parameters into the constraint function, such that we rewrite $f(x)$ as $f_\phi(x)$ where $\phi$ are learnable parameters. Learning $\phi$ is not straightforward, if we optimize $\phi$ in M-step, i.e. 
$$\max_\phi E_{x\sim q(x)}[f_\phi(x)]$$, such objective could be problematic due to the poor state of generative parameter $\theta$ at the initial stage. Instead, we can treat learning of constraint as an extrinsic reward motived by Reinforcement Learning, and get a joint learning algorithm for $\theta$ and $\phi$. 

> ## Learning with Constraint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Learning with Constraints
```
